Hello.
Welcome.
This is Best Practices for OpenGL on iOS.
My name is Richard Schryehr.
I work in Apple's GPU Software Group,
and I'd like to talk to you
about some best practices.
And what I really mean by that are some
of the ways to take code written for
the cross-platform OpenGL standard and
code written for the iOS platform and
integrating those together to build
a really high-quality application.
I'm going to cover
four main topics today.
First up are going to be view controllers
and what using a view controller to
manage your OpenGL view gets you.
Second subject is going
to be multithreading.
OpenGL has a lot of somewhat
hairy thread safety rules,
and I want to talk to you about what you
might stand to gain from multithreading,
and if so, how to do it successfully.
Third,
I want to talk about how to handle the
range of screen sizes we have on our
various iOS products today and how to
handle those as easily as possible.
And then finally,
we'll end things off by talking
about how to take advantage
of the performance of iPad 2.
So, to start things off
with view controllers.
If you haven't done any significant
amount of UIKit programming before,
you know, view controllers are an object
in a UIKit application that
plays the controller in the model
view controller design pattern.
It's responsible for
creating and managing a,
you know, either one view or an entire
view hierarchy that builds an
entire scene of an application.
This is a screenshot of Interface
Builder's new storyboard
feature and with a sample game,
in this case our Touch Fighter game.
Storyboarding lets you sort of
lay out the overall high-level
flow of your application,
which scenes the user sees,
and how the user progresses
through those scenes.
And in this case,
each one of these scenes are managed
by a separate view controller.
So if you want to start
taking use of these features,
you'll need to start from having a
view controller for all of your views,
both your 2D views and OpenGL.
So also consider the case
if you want to integrate
Game Center into your application.
Again,
Game Center generates a very complex
hierarchy of views on your behalf,
achievements, leaderboards, and the like.
And it packages all of that
up for you in the form,
again, of a view controller.
And so if you want to transition from
to a Game Center view controller,
you need a view controller
to transition from.
And that's what a lot of
OpenGL applications are missing today.
And so I'd like to talk about how
to integrate a view controller
into your OpenGL application
and then use that successfully.
So what is a view
controller responsible for?
As I said, it creates and manages
a collection of views.
It also controls transitioning from
one view controller to the next,
which is really one of the big
things that we want to enable.
And then finally, I'll add a couple of
OpenGL-specific considerations here,
one of which is deciding when you're
going to animate as your scene leaves
the user's view and comes back in.
And the second,
I'll talk a little bit in specific about
how to handle rotating your device.
Visibility is actually
pretty straightforward.
A view controller,
your subclass of view controller,
is the place where you
receive -- provides a set of
methods that you can override,
which lets you know when your view
hierarchy becomes visible or invisible.
And as the user transitions away from
your OpenGL view into another view,
you know, it makes no sense to animate
something that the user cannot see.
And so we want to start and stop that
animation at the appropriate times.
A view controller provides these really
handy call-outs -- view will appear,
view did disappear -- which
gives you a -- which gives
you a view that's not visible.
And then finally,
it allows you to animate the
view that you want to see.
Which gives you a place where
you can choose to start and stop
that animation as appropriate.
In GL kit,
we've added a new sort of default
OpenGL view controller that
you can use to do exactly this.
GLK view controller abstracts a way,
setting up a -- in this case,
a display link for you,
which produces regular animation events
that are tied to the display's refresh.
GLK View Controller determines
an appropriate frame rate,
taking into account both your
desired frame rate and the
capabilities of the display,
and it delivers these animation
events regularly on the main thread.
It also overrides these methods that
I just named to automatically start
and stop the animation as appropriate.
So, if you're one of the actually very,
very many OpenGL games who really
just looks like one big 3D view
that the entire user experience
lives in and you want to start,
you know, having your view be a
little bit less lonely,
this is actually a really great
place to start by dropping one
of these into your application.
The other aspect of
ViewControllers is rotation,
and this is particularly
interesting because in the past
we've suggested to not use this,
and I'm going to change
that advice today.
How many of you have ever seen
some game that's sort of done
something like this to you?
where various aspects of the UI just
don't agree on which way is up.
I've seen it in a number of places.
And if this application properly
used view controller rotation,
this wouldn't have happened.
So the UIViewController class also
provides iOS support for handling
device orientation and making
sure every part of the UI agrees
on what that orientation is.
In the past,
I've suggested not using this
feature because it actually had a
fairly large performance impact.
But I'm actually very,
very happy to say that as of iOS 4.3,
that performance impact
is completely gone.
View controller rotation
is free on iOS 4.3,
and so it is now, you know, it is now,
without qualification,
the best way to rotate your OpenGL views
along with every other view on iOS.
In the past,
we've suggested as an alternative,
you know,
do the rotation yourself within your
view rather than rotating your view.
And generally,
that's a little bit difficult to set up.
It's kind of annoying,
and it's actually kind of error-prone,
as we just saw.
And so you get to remove all of this.
So I want to show a little bit
about how to actually rotate your
OpenGL view with view controllers.
Step one is not
OpenGL specific in any way.
This is your standard
view controller subclass,
and you're going to override should
auto-rotate to interface orientation.
In my example,
I'm going to support every orientation.
Many games may just say landscape
left and landscape right.
The second step is specific to OpenGL.
And this is, once you have your view,
you have to create a frame buffer that
lets OpenGL render into that view.
And that frame buffer's dimensions
are set when you create it.
So if your view is -- the
bounds of a view change,
your frame buffer is not going to
change automatically behind your back.
And so you need to delete your old
frame buffer and create new ones,
which will then pick
up the new dimensions.
Usually the easiest place to do
this is in your OpenGL view subclass
where UIView provides a layout
subviews method that you can override.
This is called whenever the
bounds of the view change.
If you use GLKit's new GLK view,
it would do this automatically
for you on your behalf.
Step 3 is the best part.
This is when we can
remove a whole bunch of,
basically, hacks.
You don't have to swap the
width and height arguments
to all of your OpenGL APIs.
You don't have to mangle
your transform matrices.
You don't have to manually correct all
of your incoming touch coordinates.
The view controller transform
mechanism handles all of
this for you automatically.
And then finally, this fourth step isn't
actually writing any code.
This is a verification step.
Core animation has some very
carefully written optimizations
for getting OpenGL content onto
the display as fast as possible.
But unfortunately,
there are some things you can do
that will defeat those optimizations.
So what you can do is you
can launch instruments,
go to the core animation tool,
and then in the lower left corner here,
you'll see a checkbox called
Color OpenGL Fast Path Blue.
And it does exactly what it sounds like.
For all OpenGL views in the system,
if they are being composited
via Core animation's most
efficient path possible,
it'll put a big blue tint over that view,
in which case you know you're done.
If you don't see your view
turn blue in this case,
then you've done something to
defeat these optimizations.
For example,
your OpenGL view may be transparent.
We actually have in our
written documentation,
which I'll link to later,
quite a bit more detail on what kind
of things you can do that either enable
the really efficient compositing paths
or may force a little bit of a delay.
fallbacks to slower compositing paths,
slower but more complete
compositing paths.
So that's view controllers.
All views in an iOS application
should be managed by view controllers,
and OpenGL views are
no exception to that.
If you need to add one to
your existing application,
GL Kit provides a really good one to
use to start with in GLKViewController.
And this provides you your automatic
animation timing on the main thread.
View controller rotation is
now completely free on iOS 4,
3, and later, which erases all previous
advice to the contrary.
And then finally,
Instruments provides a really handy
tool to verify that your compositing is
being done as efficiently as possible.
So that's view controllers.
And that brings us to the second
and largest subject of the day,
and that is multithreading.
So I'm going to start by proposing a
couple different design patterns for
multithreading an OpenGL application.
The first of these is
asynchronous resource loading.
You know,
if you have an application where
you've decided that being able to,
say,
stream textures in dynamically without
interrupting rendering is desirable,
then this is the kind of design
pattern you should be looking into.
And the second design pattern I'll talk
about is to actually pick up your entire
game and move it off the main thread.
And I'll get into how to
identify if that may benefit you,
and if so,
a little bit about how to do it.
But to start with,
I'm actually going to go through
a few preliminary concepts and in
the end put them all together to
show you a functioning asynchronous
texture loader just like the one that
GLK Texture Loader provides for you.
So the first preliminary
concept is the current context.
In this case, if you have multiple
contexts in your application,
the system needs to know which one is
going to receive your OpenGL commands,
since GL calls don't take an
explicit context argument.
And this is a per-thread variable
that you can set with the
setCurrentContext class method.
It's very important to note for the
content that follows is that the
current context is per thread state.
This means that you can set a
different current context on two
different threads and call into two
different contexts concurrently.
Similarly,
it is possible to set the same context
current on two different threads,
but to do so is actually
quite dangerous because
OpenGL contexts are not thread-safe.
In this case,
our first naive attempt at the
texture loader is we set the same
context current on two threads,
and we call tech image
concurrently with ongoing
rendering on the rendering thread.
If you're lucky, this will crash.
If you're unlucky,
it'll be a lot harder to
figure out what's happening.
So if we want to be able
to have that tech image run
without blocking rendering,
without a whole bunch of synchronization,
then we need to move our text
loader to a different thread.
So let's move the rendering
thread over to context B.
The second concept is shared contexts.
By default,
OpenGL contexts all have their own
completely separate pools of objects.
One context has its own
collection of textures,
which are completely different from
another context pool of textures.
That doesn't work for us here because
we want to create a texture on one
context and then use it on another.
And the solution to that
are shared contexts.
In this case,
you can create two or more contexts
that all use the same pool of
objects in the same namespace.
In this case,
we have two textures that are shared,
or two contexts that are shared by
referencing the same share group,
and we still have a third
context on the side that's sort
of in its own separate silo.
Setting this up is really, really easy.
In this case,
we'll allocate our first context
as usual with Eagle context,
Alec, and it.
This also implicitly creates a new share
group for that context behind the scenes,
which normally you don't
have to worry about.
When creating our second context,
we'll use an alternative version
of the initializer method,
which takes an additional
share group argument,
and we'll pull that value
out of the first context.
With this,
we've now created two contexts that
both share the same pool of objects.
Now, this actually has some
implications on thread safety.
Because word before,
when I said you could call
into two separate contexts,
that was sort of on the assumption that,
again, these two contexts were
completely separate entities.
But now that we've shared them,
they're sort of intertwined again,
and so, again, there are thread safety
implications with that.
So those implications are that, well,
first thing, two contexts or more can
concurrently read from the
same objects at the same time.
So there's no problem with that.
But you cannot modify an
OpenGL object in parallel with
any other context reading from it.
So if you actually want
to safely modify objects,
first you have to quiesce all usage of
those objects on any other contexts.
Call your modification command,
in this case, techimage2d,
buffer_subdata, and so on.
And then after modifying that object,
you have to take a couple
more steps because,
you know, first,
that modification command may still be
sitting in some command queue somewhere.
It hasn't actually been pushed
all the way to the GPU yet,
which means it's not really
available for anybody else to see.
Well, the first thing to do is your
modifying context has to call gl flush,
which will guarantee that all of
those commands have at least been
minimally processed to be able
to do this dependency tracking.
After the flush returns,
all of the rest of the contexts
that want to successfully observe
this change must bind that object.
Even if it was already bound,
they have to bind it again.
Otherwise,
they may just not see the changes because
the context may be caching information
about its currently bound objects.
A little bit more about which
OpenGL commands modify objects,
since the cases I have
here are fairly obvious,
but there are some other
cases that are not obvious and
might catch you by surprise.
For example, a uniform is a property
of a GLSL program.
And so if you set a uniform,
that effectively counts as modifying
the entire program and subjecting the
entire program to this flush bind rule.
Similarly,
rendering to a frame buffer counts
as modifying the frame buffer,
and it counts as modifying all of
that frame buffer's attachments,
its color buffer, its depth buffer,
and its stencil buffer.
The implication here is that you cannot
have two contexts concurrently issuing
commands to draw into the same texture,
however tempting that may be to try.
And then finally,
I'll call out our Eagle Context
render buffer management methods,
since these are a little
bit weird in that they're
really quite specific to iOS.
As far as thread safety goes,
these methods are exactly the
same as if you called a normal
GL function on the named context,
but they are both considered to
modify the named render buffer.
In this case, the first one actually
creates our render buffer,
and the second one swaps its
current context to the display.
So with all of these put together,
we can now create our correct example
of an asynchronous texture loader.
In this case, we have our two contexts.
On our loading thread,
we'll set the loader
context to be current.
We'll create our texture
as usual and call flush.
That completes its job.
After the flush returns,
the rendering thread on its own
context can rebind that texture
and then draw from it as usual.
And this is completely correct.
However, it can actually be made a
little bit better still.
Because I've really left out all the
code around here that you didn't really
want to write in the first place.
And that is having to
go create the thread,
having to go come up with some mechanism
for doing cross-thread messaging,
marshalling of arguments,
using semaphores or condition
variables to tell the scheduler
that the thread is now runnable.
And this is a fairly standard
multi-thread producer-consumer problem,
but it's still just a lot
of busy work to write,
and there is a better way.
And so I want to take this same example
and restate it in the form of some
code using Grand Central Dispatch.
which makes all of this
quite a bit simpler,
even if, you know,
although some of you may have
not seen the syntax before.
So I want to step through this in pieces.
Right in the middle,
we have our plain old
OpenGL texture creation code,
followed by the flush for the
first half of our flush bind rule.
This code is executing within a block
that is called by dispatch async.
If you haven't seen
Grand Central Dispatch before,
Dispatch Async will schedule a
task to run on my loader queue,
which will run the code
inside of that block.
And it will do that on whatever
thread of Grand Central Dispatch
is choosing based on its knowledge
of the current load of the system.
Similarly,
when the texture load is complete,
we're going to call dispatch
async a second time and message
back to some other queue,
in this case the queue that
protects our rendering context,
and let it know that, hey,
this texture load's done and the
texture is now available for use.
And one of the coolest
things here is that,
you know,
my printf here is actually using
the variable -- is actually
using the texture name variable.
Despite the fact that my render queue
code is actually going to happen on some
other thread at some later point in time,
this is because Grand Central Dispatch
and blocks have captured the various
named variables on the stack and
pretty much automatically marshaled
them along for me just so I don't have
to actually do all of that myself.
It cleans up a whole lot of -- you know,
it cleans up a whole lot of,
quite frankly, quite boring code.
And so I'll end this by highlighting
I have some explicit calls
to set current context here.
And this is actually here
for a very good reason.
Because Grand Central Dispatch
itself selects which thread
it's going to run the task on,
and it's going to be
a thread that it owns,
and the current context
is per thread state,
it means that you can never know which
thread you're actually going to run on,
and you can never rely on the current
context when you enter a dispatch block.
And so, when using OpenGL and
Grand Central Dispatch together,
you should always explicitly
set the current context at
the beginning of your block.
Similarly,
we don't want to leave a dangling
reference to our context on
a thread that we don't own.
And so we're going to clear our
current context before leaving.
So with that,
we now have an asynchronous texture
loader that can let your main thread
run unimpeded and does so with
actually a very small amount of code.
And if you had the ability to look
inside GLKit's new texture loader,
this is pretty much exactly
what it does internally.
So if you need asynchronous
texture loading,
you can either do it in just a
couple lines of code with GLKit if
you have more common needs,
or if you need to do
something really exotic,
you know, reimplementing it yourself
is actually quite possible.
So with that,
I'm going to switch subjects a little
bit and talk about the other usage case,
where you actually want to pick up
your entire game or your rendering
loop and move it all off of the main
thread and onto a background thread.
Why would you do that?
So one big thing that matters
to quite a few game developers,
especially game developers porting
code from another platform,
is control over the event loop.
On an iOS application's main thread,
you have to return control to the NS run
loop really quite frequently because
that's the run loop that's going to
deliver pretty much all of the events
that come from iOS into your application.
So if you've got a game that really
wants to have the model of sitting
in a while loop and spinning forever,
that's not going to work very well.
So you can either try to --
some developers have tried to
restructure their code to fit
within the model of getting,
you know,
regular event callouts from that run loop
via timers or display links and the like.
and a number of others have
also had quite a bit of success
just picking their code up and
moving it off to another thread,
which they control.
And what you get out of
that is that's your thread,
and you can build whatever
event loop you want on it.
Another really interesting
reason to do this is to avoid
blocking on the main thread.
Normally we consider blocking
something that happens when you
do file system or network I/O,
and you block your main thread
for tens of seconds at a
time if something goes wrong.
OpenGL doesn't really block
anything for tens of seconds,
but it certainly can block your main
thread for tens of milliseconds.
For most applications,
that really doesn't matter,
but there are a few
we've seen that really,
really demand very low latency
response to things like touch events,
where this actually did
become a bit of a problem.
And so by getting that work off
of the main thread and leaving
the event loop pretty much,
the main thread's event loop
pretty much uncontended,
you know, they had some success in
addressing that problem.
It's not something that
many game developers,
not a problem that many
game developers face,
but it was an important issue for some.
And then finally, especially on iPad 2,
utilizing multiple CPU cores.
Picking up your whole game and moving it
to one background thread doesn't actually
use multiple CPU cores quite yet,
but it is one really big step
in that direction in setting
your application up to do that.
So I'm going to include it here because
it's sort of a preliminary to that.
So if you've decided this is
something that might benefit you,
then how do you go about doing it?
Well, the first thing is,
way back on your main thread,
you still should have your view
managed by a view controller subclass,
but you should use your own
subclass and not GLKViewController.
Because as I said before,
GLKViewController is all about
a really easy way to get regular
animation events on that main thread.
And once you're not there anymore,
it's not doing much for you.
So that means that you are
going to have to create your
own UIViewController subclass,
override the visibility methods,
and signal your background thread as
appropriate when it's time to start
and stop animation as appropriate.
Another thing is,
you do want to pick one thread
to do all of your OpenGL work on,
and be very careful to make sure
that you haven't accidentally
left anything behind.
Consider this very
easy trap to fall into,
where we have our very same layout
subviews that we talked about earlier.
Well, UIKit, when you're -- when you're
-- say the device rotates,
UIKit is going to handily call
that on the main thread for you.
This could be very
difficult to track down.
So in this case, you know,
whenever you see this or
any other cases like it,
usually the thing to do is either--
you'll either have to signal the
background thread to do the work or
even just leave a flag set on the
main thread and let your background
rendering loop pick it up on its
next trip through the animation loop.
In this case, we'll see the flag,
we'll reallocate the frame buffers,
and we'll clear them.
In turn,
our create framebuffers will end up
calling the Eagle context render buffer
storage from drawable in that API,
and that API is perfectly safe
to call from a background thread.
Today I've mentioned both using
threads at some point and using
Grand Central Dispatch at other points.
Which one of these should you use?
Well, if you're really just looking to
control your own event loop and
you're not going to do any more
aggressive multithreading beyond that,
then creating one thread that you
own and sticking your while loop in
it is probably perfectly adequate.
There's not much that
Grand Center Dispatch adds
for you in such a usage case.
So in this case, create your one thread,
move your code there,
and you're pretty much done.
However, if you're going to be a little
bit more ambitious and you
really want to take advantage of
iPad 2's dual-core processors,
then you're going to say, "Oh,
I'm going to divide my physics
work up into multiple threads.
I'm going to do skinning,
my game logic AI, and so on."
Now, that's the kind -- when you
start having these more complex
graphs of work between tasks,
that's when Granted Dispatch
starts to be a really,
really big convenience,
and you should seriously consider
leveraging it as much as possible.
That being said,
as widely as you take your own
code in terms of tasks execute,
I still very strongly suggest that
you keep all of your OpenGL API usage,
again,
into just one thread or just one task.
As we've seen,
OpenGL's thread safety rules
are kind of tricky to get right.
And usually the best answer is to
just not tempt that and multi-thread
everything else around it and have
it all feed into one final task.
For example,
you could have your game update for
the next frame happening in parallel
with OpenGL for the previous frame,
but you should avoid doing
OpenGL in parallel with OpenGL.
There are two other sessions on
Grand Central Dispatch if you
haven't heard all about it already.
The first one of which happened
this morning and I believe
was completely sold out,
called Blocks in
Grand Central Dispatch in Practice.
So I highly suggest you
catch that on video.
And there'll be another session
happening tomorrow morning called
Mastering Grand Central Dispatch,
which is going to be a bit
more of an advanced course.
So both of these are fantastic
sessions to attend if
multithreading interests you at all.
So in summary, OpenGL is not limited to
the main thread in any form.
You can use OpenGL from
any thread you want,
but I do suggest that you
keep it to one thread.
will draw an exception for this
asynchronous texture loading case
because that design pattern is well
enough contained that it's pretty easy
to get right and make it efficient.
So, but other than that,
keep your actual active
animation loop all in one place.
And that's multithreading.
That brings us to our
third subject of the day,
and that are screen sizes.
Across the range of iOS devices today,
you will see three screen sizes that
you want to support in your application.
On iPhone 3GS,
You'll see 320 by 480.
On iPhone 4, you'll see the Retina
display at 960 by 640.
And finally, on iPad,
you'll see something a little
bit larger at 1024 by 768.
To an OpenGL developer,
the biggest implication this
has on you is performance.
The larger your frame buffer is,
the more times your
fragment shader has to run,
the longer it takes to fill.
In this case,
note that iPhone 4 has to fill four
times as many pixels as the iPhone 3GS.
And while its GPU is faster
than the iPhone 3GS's,
I can't tell you that it
is four times as fast.
So in this case, if your application is
fragment shader bound,
it won't be too surprising to see that
your application might actually perform
slower on an iPhone 4 than a 3GS.
And in turn, iPad is, again,
about 30% larger still.
So what to do about this?
Well, the first thing to do is, you know,
go through the standard
set of optimizations.
You know, I'll go, you know,
make your fragment shaders
as simple as possible.
Try to, you know,
use smaller texture formats,
especially in iPad 1.
Texture lookup tables may be a
better preference for doing math,
so on.
This is all advice that you'll find in
written documentation and that we've
discussed in more detail in years past.
You know, you want to strongly consider
your fragment shader coverage.
Every layer of blending you do,
you're now filling that
pixel multiple times.
And if you've got four times
the screen coverage and
you're filling every pixel 4,
10, 25 times,
it starts to multiply up very quickly.
The architecture is a
unified shader architecture,
so if you're drawing a
huge number of vertexes,
that very well can sap performance
away from fragment shading.
In this case,
the OpenGL driver monitor and
instruments can give you a feel
for what the utilization of the
vertex processor is and let you
know if this might be a factor.
But, you know,
these are your standard optimizations,
and they're good on
all devices everywhere.
If you find that this just is not enough
to get you to your performance targets,
there's one really big tool you
still have available to you,
and that is to directly attack
what changed to slow your
application down in the first place.
And that is to back off a little bit
on the frame buffer width and height.
Now, take the example of
iPhone 4's Retina display.
If we were to fill 720
by 480 pixels instead,
you're only covering 56%
as many pixels as before.
If your application was
fragment shader bound,
it is not unreasonable to expect that
your application will actually be nearly
twice as fast by making this change.
That's a really,
really big tool available to
you to improve performance.
Now, we don't want to leave big
black bars on an iPhone screen.
So, fortunately,
Core Animation has some really
easy support for taking your lower
resolution content and scaling it
back up to fill the entire view.
And that takes just one line of code.
That is UIView's content
scale factor property,
which effectively determines
how much detail every view
in the system is drawn with.
And this applies to OpenGL views as
much as it applies to every other view.
If your content scale factor is,
in most cases,
less than the scale of the screen,
then you're going to be
rendering to a lower resolution,
and Core Animation will transparently
scale your content back up to fill
the bounds of the original view.
As we saw with rotation,
your frame buffer size is fixed,
and so if you want to -- when you
change your content scale factor,
you have to reallocate your frame
buffers to pick up the new dimensions,
as before.
This support is very,
very efficient on all of
the larger screen devices,
iPhone 4 and iPad.
The API works as described on
the smaller screen devices,
but it's neither efficient
there nor is there really any
reason to need to use it there.
So, but on the large screen devices,
this can be a lifesaver.
Then comes external displays
where there is more variety.
In this case, on iPhone 4 and iPad 1,
you'll often see 480p
displays or 720p displays.
iPad 2 cannot put to 1080p.
Now, 720p is, again,
about a 30% larger still
than the iPad's display,
and 1080p is twice as large again.
It adds up very, very quickly.
So what to do about this?
Well, the first thing is,
if your application is using mirroring,
or, more accurately,
if you've done nothing,
then you still get to do nothing.
Your application is rendering at
its internal display resolution,
and you're done.
The user will see the mirrored content.
However, if you're going to drive the
external display into second
display mode because you want to put
different content on the internal
display and on the external display,
then the performance implications
here start to matter to you.
So my suggestion here is when
developing your application,
based on your performance targets
and your performance measurements,
you want to pick sort of your upper
bound on how big of an external
display you are going to support.
You know,
usually that'll be 720p because that's
closest to the iPad's display size.
However, if you have a really
aggressive application,
maybe something smaller
is more appropriate.
At runtime, you can query the available
modes on the display with the
UIScreenAvailableModes property.
You'll want to iterate --
enumerate through this array,
find the best match for your
development time target,
and assign that match
to the mode property.
This will cause a mode
switch on the display and,
for example,
get it down from 1080p to 720p.
On an external display,
you also have the option of using
the content scale factor solution,
although it tends to be a little
bit less efficient than just
setting the display mode directly.
So, when given the option,
set the display mode first
and then rely on content scale
factor from there if necessary.
There is actually an entire session on
handling AirPlay and external displays,
which happened yesterday,
so you'll have to catch that on video.
But it goes into all of these
topics in quite a bit more detail.
The other side of supporting
different display sizes is actually
the size of your input textures.
So I'm going to take all of your
input textures and subdivide
them into two course buckets.
The first of those are going to
be your user interface textures.
These are your buttons, your HUDs,
anything you're drawing
to a screen-aligned quad.
These are the kind of
things that tend to be,
you know,
quite specific to a particular DPI,
to a particular aspect ratio.
You know,
it matters if it's iPad versus iPhone.
For these, much like UI images in
normal UIKit applications,
you probably actually need to draw,
you know,
draw a different version of that texture
for each one of the screen size targets.
At runtime,
when it comes time to load them,
you can do something like UIImage,
which provides this built-in
naming convention where you
can just say load image,
and based on the file names,
it will automatically pick up the
right version of that image depending
on what device you're running on.
Or, even easier,
you can use UIImage to actually
load your images and not have
to worry about it at all.
So then comes the other
bucket of textures.
And those are the textures that don't
have a DPI in any way because they're
the -- they're the mipmap textures that
you're wrapping across a 3D object.
For these,
the best approach is to actually
-- you really don't want to
generate three different versions
of your textures offline.
Because there's no DPI,
there's really no reason to do that.
And so what you'll do here is you should
generate the full set of bitmaps offline,
you know,
one bitmap stack for all devices,
and ship all of those images
in your application bundle.
At runtime,
depending on either you're on a
smaller screen device or you're on a
device that has somewhat less memory,
you can simply choose to, for example,
skip loading the most detailed level.
You may want to only do this for
some textures and not others,
you know,
maybe an artistic decision depending
on what's actually important to
the look of your application.
Oftentimes,
you can get away with this without
actually having any impact on
the visual quality of the app.
So I've sort of put together this
example where we have a texture,
the same scene drawn on a 3GS resolution
and an iPad screen resolution.
Each MIP level has been
given a different color tint,
with the reds being the more detailed
levels and the greens and yellows
being the less detailed levels.
You know, as you can see,
for exactly the same scene,
the 3GS screen really tops
out at the 512 by 512,
this sort of purplish level,
whereas on iPad,
you can see quite a bit more detail.
On the 3GS, you can barely see the small
sliver on the column where the
largest texture level was used.
If that texture level just
did not exist on the 3GS,
it would have had very,
very little impact on the
user-perceived quality.
And so this could be a really easy way
to both significantly reduce memory
usage and also to reduce loading time
on the devices that were probably
taking longer to load to begin with.
So that's their screen sizes.
There are three internal
screen sizes to support.
The larger ones are more
expensive for the GPU to fill.
If necessary, you can use content scale
factor to reduce the resolution.
If that's an appropriate
solution for your application,
you know, actually really depends on the
exact content you're drawing.
Some applications have been more
successful than others with that.
If you're supporting an external display,
then prefer setting the display mode
before turning down content scale factor.
That will generally be a
little bit more efficient.
And then finally,
bake all your levels offline,
and at runtime,
then it's easy to just skip one
to save memory and loading time.
So that is screen sizes.
So that brings us to our last
topic of the day and the most fun.
And that is what to do with an iPad 2.
So as you heard
Gil Khan describe earlier today,
iPad 2, we've exposed a number of new
features on iPad 2 in iOS 5.
We've improved support for Float
16 rendering and texturing.
We've added support for
binary occlusion query.
We've added support for an
extension in GLSL that does
for sample shadow filtering.
And we've also increased
the maximum texture size.
At runtime,
if you want to know these features
are -- you want to check if
these features are available,
then, as always,
the one true way to do that is
with OpenGL's extension string.
All of these, except for the 4K textures,
have a specific extension
name to check for,
and the 4K textures has the
sort of classic get integer max
texture size that you can query.
Separate from features,
and probably much more interestingly,
is performance.
iPad 2 is really fast.
It is hugely faster than any
previous product of ours.
In this case, and it's not just one area
of the device that's faster,
it's all faster all around.
The number of shader instructions
per second you can execute,
the number of texture samples,
the memory bandwidth,
the vertexes per second,
triangle setup rate,
every part of it is hugely faster.
Within your shaders,
the performance degradation
you go from low precision to
medium and high precision in
your shader is actually much,
much reduced.
There's not much you pay
there at all anymore.
This opens up a whole range of new
shader algorithms that previously
may have been difficult because they
really demanded the higher precisions.
The ratio of shader instructions
to texture samples has sort
of swung dramatically in
favor of shader instructions.
So, you know, but where before, you know,
you may have -- some
people found success,
you know,
replacing math in their shaders with
lookup tables baked into textures.
On iPad 2,
it may actually be more efficient to
go back to just doing the math again.
So how do you tell if this
performance is available to you?
Well, unfortunately,
there is no direct query
for OpenGL performance,
but we've got a pretty good proxy
in the OpenGL renderer string.
In this case, this returns a string that
names the model of GPU that
you are currently using.
On all of the devices
that iOS 5 supports,
you'll see one of two values from that:
PowerVR SGX535, which is the GPU used
on iPad 1 and previous.
And on iPad 2,
you will see PowerVR SGX543.
So if you see this value,
that's your best indication that
you have this huge performance
potential available to you.
I do want to make one caution in
that this is returning a string,
and without saying anything,
someday there will be a third
or fourth or fifth entry there.
So please do code defensively
here and do something reasonable
when you see an unexpected value.
In this case,
something reasonable is probably
going to be to default to your
highest quality rendering path.
So, once you've detected this,
what can you do with it?
So remember what I said about content
scale factor and turning that down?
Forget it.
Turn it all the way back up,
all the way as high as it goes.
It can handle it.
Throw in full-scene
multi-sampling while you're at it.
You can do that, too.
It's got more than enough
performance for that.
If you had problems with level
of blending and overdraw,
you have much, much,
much more budget for that specifically.
You can either have a
larger number of particles,
you can have larger size particles,
generally a much higher density
in your particle systems.
Similarly,
if you're using blending for drawing
trees or other kinds of foliage.
It's not just the GPU that's faster,
the CPU is quite a bit faster as well.
And even on a single thread,
the CPU is going to get through an
OpenGL draw call in much less time,
which means that you can afford to
do a much larger number of draw calls
every second in your application.
If your application is multi-threaded
and moving other work off to other cores,
then that just goes up from there.
On the shading side,
the first thing you should be
looking at is to actually move
to proper per-pixel lighting.
As I said,
you can actually get away with using
much greater precision in your shaders.
In this case,
actually writing shaders that do a
reasonable amount of high-precision math
is well within the performance budget.
You can use high-precision normal
maps and gloss maps to provide really
high-quality per-pixel lighting.
This is something that you saw
Real Racing 2 use to great effect.
We've had a really interesting
recent example in light probes.
The Shadowgun demo that you saw used
precomputed light probes to apply
baked indirect lighting onto dynamic
objects that moved around the scene.
Parallax mapping is a very interesting
technique that has actually been used
to great effect in Epic Citadel to
improve the perceived detail on surfaces.
You also have performance
budget now for shadow mapping.
In this case, we have a new GLSL function
to actually do,
you know, read sample from the shadow
map and filter it for you.
We've actually seen examples
of all of these techniques,
and sometimes all of
them at the same time,
used in real shipping applications.
Now, these are all techniques
that are well within the
performance budget of an iPad 2.
We wanted to go a little bit farther and
see what iPad 2 was really capable of.
And so I want to show
you what we came up with.
So you've seen a few shots of this
in various instances earlier today,
but I want to talk about this
demo and what it's doing in
a little bit more detail.
This is a demo of a technique
called light pre-pass rendering,
which is in turn one of a class of
techniques called deferred shading.
One of the big advantages of this
kind of technique is that it provides,
you know,
it lets you dramatically increase the
number of dynamic lights in your scene.
In this case,
all of these little lights you see,
our little fairies here,
are all each a... There's 64 of them,
and they're all each a light
casting per-pixel lighting
on the surrounding geometry.
One of the things that this class
of deferred shading techniques lets
you do is draw all of your geometry,
completely ignoring what
lights apply to them,
and then later draw all of your lights,
completely ignoring what
geometry they apply to,
which is what lets it scale so well
with a much larger number of lights.
So how is this actually put together?
Well, the first thing is,
we have rendering of the shadows
that are casted by the sun.
So Gokhan talked about this
a little bit earlier today.
But this is our shadow map.
The second step in the Light Prepass
technique is to render our G buffer.
In this case, we're rendering two images.
We're rendering our color buffer,
which we're actually
not writing colors to,
but we're actually writing
viewspace normals of that pixel.
On the left, we're actually running
to a depth texture,
recording the depth from
the camera of that pixel.
So what that lets you do is
that if you read the depth from
this texture and you know its x,
y coordinates in the texture,
you can reconstruct where
that point was in 3D space.
In turn, that lets you find out how
far that was from the light,
and given that you also can find
the normal from the other texture,
that gives you what you need to
calculate the lighting equation.
And that leads to the next pass,
which is to actually render the lights.
So this image is actually a little
bit misleading in what it's doing.
This is actually, you know,
it looks like we're drawing lights
on top of our little temple with,
you know, trees around it,
but we're actually not applying
lights to the geometry at all.
We're applying lights to the images,
the G buffer that we just saw.
What we're actually drawing are spheres,
or some very coarse
approximation thereof,
and for every pixel on the
surface of that sphere,
we're looking up into the normal texture,
we're looking up into the depth texture,
and using that to calculate what the
contribution from this dynamic light is.
One sphere per dynamic light.
And then we just add that in to
the light buffer as we move along.
And that leaves us with our light image.
And our final step is to
composite all of that together,
where we effectively blend that
light image in with the geometry
again with its diffused texture.
We also sample from that shadow
map that we saw in the beginning
to determine the sun shadowing.
So just to show you what this
kind of thing lets you do,
if we remove all of the
actual fairies in the scene,
then you can see how much character
that takes out of the scene.
And it gives you a really easy idea of
what the ability to just throw a lot
of lights at the problem gives you.
So this is a light prepress
renderer rendering four passes,
our shadow pass, G buffer, light,
and final composition.
It is applying 64 dynamic lights to this
object and also applying one light from
the sun that fills the entire scene.
The sun is casting soft shadows
via a 1024 by 1024 shadow map,
all running at 30 frames
per second on an iPad 2.
So that brings us to the
end of today's presentation.
So a quick summary of what we went over.
We talked about view controllers.
Unless you want your
OpenGL view to be very,
very lonely, it needs to have a view
controller paired with it.
We talked about some
OpenGL multi-thread design patterns,
in which case OpenGL's thread concurrency
rules and some suggested design patterns
on how to use those effectively.
We talked about handling the range of
three internal display sizes and more
external display sizes if you choose
to support the second display feature.
And then finally,
we went over a little bit about what
you can do with the extra features and
the performance that iPad 2 provides.
If you'd like more information,
you can contact Alan Schaefer,
our graphics and game
technologies evangelist.
We have a very large document
called the OpenGL ES Programming
Guide for iOS that is available
on Apple's developer website.
This has a lot of information in
it that we did not cover today.
We also have a section in the
Apple Developer Forums specifically
for OpenGL that actually
gets quite a bit of traffic,
both beginner, expert,
and a number of people from
Apple's OpenGL team contributing
to answer questions there.
Thank you.